University of North Texas and Texas A&M has
reached out a lot. Now, UT has a center that does a
lot of research, and they're going out and working
with schools and those kind of things. I don't
think that they've really had that serious
commitment, and I think they've probably missed
the opportunity as well. See, we've got too many
doctors.
I'm
sorry
they
don't have the academic courses to really make the
intellectual, academic side of the doctoral
program what it ought to be. But they're more
field-based, perhaps.
I'd recommend four, probably. Four. Now, the
fourth one may be a combination, say, that may be
partially online, that may be really for the
practitioner, It could be a combination,
perhaps, of Stephen Foster, Sam Houston State.
And I would like to see a systems doctor at Texas A&M
University, a systems doctor. And I would
recommend the same thing to the University of
Texas system. Have a systems doctor so that
they're related to the affiliated institution.
You know, we talk about not having enough academic
courses, but probably each one of those
institutions has one or two people who are as good
as the ones at Texas A&M University. So if you
really could do some imaginative work, and I
talked about this earlier with our former
chancellor, who has a PhD in education, I think,
about assistance doctrine, and it did make some of
my colleagues very happy. I organized a meeting
with all professors in the A&M system in Austin
about three years ago, and we proposed the idea
there, and it wasn't very popular because Oh, he
thought he was super, I guess. Barry Thompson? Oh,
yeah. And Bill Reed does as well. But it was just
that idea that we're taking the scholarship away
from the institutions when in fact we wouldn't be.
We would have the making accessible and the
assisting doctors, and they would have the best of
the best. from each institution and also be able to
provide very rich internship mentoring programs
for young superintendents and principals doing
that. That may not come about.
I think one of the big A couple
of us really had a great idea, I thought, to have a
course on the history development of American
education as being a cornerstone to the strength
of America. And having a course that was really
interdisciplinary taught by some of the really
exciting teachers on campus and have that
centered in the College of Education
And it's absolutely critical to the future of our
country. Well, I put together some ideas. Jack
Campbell, who was in philosophy at that time, and a
couple others were excited about it. But you know,
when we got right down to it, the College of
Education said, who's going to teach? Where are
the resources? If we get it passed, what are we
going to do about it? And then, of course, there was
some of the other friction. I believe we have to
force them to have education as a discipline,
taught. And that was a missed opportunity. I
really believe it. Most students who go into
engineering or even liberal arts or whatever have
no clue about the structure of American
education, how it's funded, and how
important it is to our society. Almost 95% of them.
So that was a missed opportunity. And that was just
another dream I had, I guess.
The first women I remember were taking courses in
summer before women were admitted to the
institution. But when I was working on my PhD, I was
almost finished in 67. And in fact, I was going
through some stuff. And we were spelling mother
and dad's house the other day and parceling out
things. I found a memo signed by Haskell Monroe.
approving my acceptance of candidacy, providing
I take another course or two or finish my
dissertation, those kinds of things. At that
time, I remember the first woman coming into the
graduate program, and that would have been about
1967. Prior to that, I can't remember a woman in the
graduate program When we went from the Department
of Education and Psychology in the College of
Liberal Arts to the College of Education in 1969,
then women started coming in in smaller numbers.
So out of the first 50 doctors, I guess I'd have to
look across that list. I'd say probably six of
them, seven of them are women.
I really don't, but there were so few of them. It was
difficult to say. I remember one woman named Blum
was a very bright, very good student, and I
remember she blended in very well with most of the
males. And now, of course, about half of our
students in administration are women. And now
that we've combined the Department of
Administration and Human Resource Development,
it may be 60%.
Well, there was, in terms of looking at the first
women on this faculty in administration, they had
women in teacher education faculty before
administration faculty. I'm trying to think who
the first woman would have been, unless it's
probably the model agent, perhaps, about...
about seven or eight years ago, I guess. And I can't
remember a woman faculty, and I can remember
adjuncts, so people coming in to teach courses,
but full-time, I think, Dr. Lincoln. Now we have
two
African-American women. We have
two, three women. three Anglo women, and that's
out of a full-time faculty of about 10 people. So we
really made some difference there in terms of
color and gender in our department. I feel really
good about that, and I think all of us do.
It's been like the nation in terms of staffing
schools. I think the men dominate the secondary
level in the principalships, and the women.
There's far more men teaching secondary level and
junior high level than you find at the elementary
level. Most of the principals at the elementary
level are women, when 40 years ago they were men. So
women are coming in through the elementary level,
taking assistant superintendents, and then
become superintendents, because even though the
secondary principal is the gateway to the
superintendency. Most of those positions still
held by men, but since there's a great concern now
about who's going to fill those apprenticeships,
we know some of our women are doing a great job, and
just as tough as the guys, and many times
understand curriculum better than the guys
because we've been at the elementary level. Now,
in terms of the accountability issues in the
state, us in North Carolina are considered to have
the best accountability system in the nation.
Because of our concern, I guess, going back to
early legislation in the 1980s, when Governor
White was here,
we started right then with testing, with tabs,
teams, to toss tests. And so where we've made great
strides, I think, in terms of student
achievement, We also make great strides with
numbers of kids taking ACP and SAT. We have 53% of
Texans now taking the ACP, SAT. When 15 years ago,
there might have been 30% taking it. And as you well
know, as a college president and professor, the
more people taking the SAT, ACP, you've got a
pretty good chance of the grades leveling off or
certainly even dipping.
Mm-hmm. Well, there's no question about it. I
think that his vision for education and the kinds
of legislation that came about during this time
set the stage for improving schools. We had a real
problem, I think, when the parole commission came
along about seven or eight years ago that Dean
Torrigan served on. Corrigan was the only bright
light on that committee, and they removed
education and discipline from the colleges,
thinking that there was no academic content
there. And now we have a real problem preparing
teachers with a few numbers of education. That's
another missed opportunity. I think we have this
university and other universities fighting that
kind of mentality that all teaching is
content-driven. And Corrigan was the only bright
light, but we lost that battle. And so it's been
difficult. We can't major in the health and
kinesiology here. I mean, we can't major in the
physical education here. Major in any major in
health and kinesiology or interdisciplinary
studies. Now, at the graduate level, you can,
education administration. So that was a missed
opportunity, I think, in
the state. I think probably, I can't remember I
know some of them at that time were out in Bowen,
head of the State Board of Education. I'm trying to
think of his name. He's been deceased for a while.
Frank Hubert, they were advising. So we had some
really solid people advising White, but I think he
said,
that were not bright lights, or as they say, not the
sharpest knife in the door. And where Bush has come
on, and George Bush has come on and gotten a lot of
credit, to his credit, he did appoint a top person
for the Commission of Education, Mike Moses,
who's now 11th. And he had put the right things in
motion with the governor's support to really help
the governor, I think, get the name, get at least
the brand of being an education governor. And I
want to give him some credit for that. But he knew
how to appoint the right person to get things
going. And now he's appointed Jim Nelson, who's
his friend, a lawyer, and he's doing a good job. But
obviously he doesn't have the respect that the
superintendent gave to Mike Moses. And I've got
November I'll have Jim Nelson coming here for the
second year in a row through our conference with
the superintendent. He's gaining more favor
because he's real positive about things.
Uh-huh.
Not particularly. Certainly Connolly, White,
and I think Bush as well.
Oh, I think probably our
SMU, Bill Clements. would get a low mark, even
though he kind of took the governorship. Smith, I
think, low mark. Because they just didn't have a
vision for education.
Yeah. Started here, it was really tough. I was
recruited to come here. I really didn't apply
officially. And the opportunity to come back
home, and the first thing out of the bat, I wound up
with a very huge U.S. Department of Education
grant that Jim McNamara had authored. But I wound
up being an essential investigator on it the first
year. I wound up also planning... the
Administrative Leadership Institute, teaching
full class load, and took on several doctoral
students immediately. And it was pretty heavy.
Then, as time went on, I was able to, I think, get
myself a little more organized. But as I did that, I
became more and more involved at the national
level. Early 80s, I spent time watching BC away
from campus. We took a sabbatical and was in Europe
in 85-86 to try to ease the pain. In 1985, I'd been
here about 10 years, and I was exhausted. I mean,
I'd lost my zeal for teaching. I had an opportunity
to go to the University of Virginia. They wanted me
to come. They had a chair there. They were
interested in me taking it. And... And all of a
sudden, Boston University called. I had talked to
them one summer. I called a global workshop in the
Mediterranean for them. And they called and said,
we would like you to go to Europe for a year for us and
be our guest professor. And that was a godsend. I
left for a full year. They covered me here. Boston
picked up all my benefits and salaries. When I got
back from that, my whole life took on a different
meaning. I was more excited, more intellectually
challenged. And that's when I started, I think,
really becoming more productive as a writer, as a
speaker, as a teacher. And since that time, I've
been involved with the study abroad program, so I
can go to Europe occasionally and get abroad when I
get so steamed. Because I'm either writing on a
book or doing research papers or speaking. My life
has changed in terms of when I wrote this little
book on the study of the future.
This was a 1995 publication. All of a sudden, my
speaking opportunities became much, much
greater, at least assignments. And I think the
more and more I taught and the more I spoke and the
more I wrote, the more my life has become much
busier. But I've learned to deal with it better.
I'm doing too much all the time, but I've learned to
deal with it better. I'm not happy unless I'm just
hell-mell now into writing and speaking and those
kind of things. So I moved very quickly from full
professorship, and then a couple of times people
talked with me about taking deanship, but I just
didn't leave. And now most of the things I do I
really enjoy doing, even though I've taken on too
many assignments. here and across the nation. But
thank God for that year in Europe. And we don't have
enough sabbaticals at this university. We have
developmental leave now, more opportunities
maybe in our department than we've ever had. And
that's a good sign. But I served on the
developmental leave committee here several
years. And you had to absolutely snow everybody.
You had to have the most brilliant thing. You had
all these caveats. You couldn't be writing a book.
You couldn't do this. You couldn't do that. You had
to actually be going. If you're going somewhere,
you couldn't be going somewhere to write a book.
That was not academic. And so it was almost tough to
get us back. It was almost impossible around here.
Now the opportunity has come. I had to make my own
break to go to Washington for four months. And I
worked with Dr. Corrigan. He told me to write a
draft on how I could cover myself while I was gone.
He helped me do that. The year in Europe, they hired
somebody to teach my classes. But I had to lay it out
and show them how we could do that. This college was
not used to anybody taking developmental leave.
And I think, truly, I was one of the first people to
say, I've got to get out of here. I've got to repress
because I'm involved in too many things.
Speaking, writing, teaching, committees on
campus, athletic council, church work, board
presence, the kind of things that busy, crazy
people do. So thank God for that sabbatical, and
then the study abroad and the European
experiences here have really helped me.
I've been pretty fortunate there. I've talked
about... four, maybe five courses since I've been
here. Three of them I have taught, the same three I
have taught for the last 10 years. I'm teaching the
course called The Nature and Problems of
Administrative Behavior, which is our top
doctoral leadership organizational dynamics
behavior course. I'm teaching a course on program
evaluation, which is now, I have adopted it to the
state academic indicator system,
accountability system, so that we go online and
really look at data of all the school systems to see
how well they're doing on the top stats, on
attendance, the criteria to determine whether
you're exemplary, recognized, acceptable, or
not. I'll have to change the shift there, but
that's a great course primarily for K-12 teachers
who want to be a part of this. The third course is the
Educational Planning Futurism course, which I
brought here in 75, and it is truly an
interdisciplinary course. I taught it
yesterday. I've got students in engineering,
business, and education, and that's an exciting
course because we look at broad futures.
Education is only part of that, but those are three
courses that I really, really, really treasure.
Okay? All right, the first course, the
administrative behavior courses, are primarily
our PhD students who are, they take that, try to
take that during the earliest part of their
doctoral program because it is the, and I think my
colleagues will agree, it's the heartbeat of our
discipline. It is the terminology, it is the
theory of basics, where we come from. and how we're
trying to develop more of a respect in terms of our
research and our development arm there, in terms
of who we are as an organization, drawing on all
kinds of organizational theory and literature.
Next course, the program evaluation class,
mostly master students who are principals, who
are working for a principal certification, or who
are classroom teachers, who want to understand
accountability, because I spend a lot of time on
teacher groups, teaching cycles, how to evaluate
students, And in the third course, I've got two
entrepreneurs in there who are not working on
PhDs, who've been in the business world. I've got a
retired professor from mechanical engineering
who's just sitting in on the class. I've got seven
or eight in ag development, international
development. I've got an educational
psychologist. I've got about 12. five or six, I
guess, who are in higher education one way or
another. Most of them are at the doctoral level.
Some are at
the master's level. Yes, in the theory class, they
have two exams. I guess my midterm exam is known as
the, it's the most feared exam in this department
from all I can hear. But all it is, I just make sure
they know the terminology, know the literature,
they know the names, they know the systems thought
that's come over the years. And then they have a
final exam in that course. They have a term paper on
some theories and or theory. They have critiques.
They must read and turn in critiques that are
readings that are found in the syllabus or
elsewhere that's tied to that direct topic.
They've got to have something read and turned in
before we start a new topic. Then they're assigned
a consistent professorship, where they actually
draw on the hat and pull out a reading. And if they
don't understand what that person's written, you
have to call them, get in touch with them. They've
got to share with me. Tonight I'm talking about
leadership for him. They've got to talk about
what, say, Harlan Cleveland might have talked
about, what he might have said. The other class,
the program evaluations class, I put them in
groups of four. They, then, can select any school
system in the state of Texas. They've got to, I
mean, they've got to look at, they've got to go
online, they've got to get a tremendous
understanding of that school district in terms of
its wealth, its demographics, its test scores,
its dropouts, its faculty, how well educated they
are, superintendent, how long they've been
there, board members, everything about them. And
they've got to report. Why do they think that
district's doing better than it should, or why
it's not doing as well as it should? And then each of
those committee members have to do one of the
campuses and describe it very well. My goal is
they've got to know more about accountability
when they go back at the end of that course and their
principal, or after superintendent. Third
course, the future class, and it's exciting. I put
them into teams of, I've got 22 students. I've got
teams of five. They've got to create a community.
through the year 2020, like Hoyleville there,
city limits population 50,000, and they'll
present that. I have been Don Sweeney from Urban
Planning, and they've got to present a city
through the year 2020 that has everything, their
food, their transportation, their medicine,
their religious centers, their recreation, all
about that. and explained to us, and they win a
prize. That one team that wins gets a prize, and the
prizes are made in my garage. I won't tell you what
they are, because it's a fantastic prize. They
look terrible, but the kids love them. The
students love them. Then the other project, each
of them has to write a personal scenario. Ten years
in future. They can't be failures. They've got to
be successful. They've got to say what they're
doing, how well they're doing it, how they're
getting to where they're doing it, how they're
using information. And they've got to tell us how
they got there from this point. And those are the
major assignments in the future class. And it's
really, I run into people all the time 15 years
later that reach in their pocket and pull out a
little clear marble that I've given them in this
class. I've done it for 20 years. And they've got to
carry that everywhere they go. Because I say, once
you run into problems in your life, I want you to
think about what you've learned, use the good
intellect you have, Put the crows and toms down on
your decision. Get that little crystal ball out.
Look into it and make your decision. And that's
been a real joy, a labor of love, that class over the
years to see what's happened to people. Because
every once in a while, Kay and you or someone will
say, what's your track record in terms of people
writing scenarios? I said, it's scary. It's
phenomenal how they follow those scenarios.
Because it's the first time in most of their
careers They've never had to write down specific
goals of where they're going in their life. So
those are the three things.
Most of them are out in the real world or are working
on this campus. Now, some of them come right out of
the bachelor's into the master's. We discourage
that unless they're going into student affairs
work. So I'll have some SAHI or student affairs
people send.
Generally they're from Texas, but we are now more
and more getting people coming in from out of state
for our program. We have built kind of a reputation
through our department. We've got some obviously
internationally known people in our department,
so we're beginning to attract people from out of
state.
We occasionally will attract one or two from
Taiwan. Often we've had two from Russia who come
here, and so we're beginning more and more to see.
And we have Chinese visiting scholars, and we've
had two or three students from China in the last two
or three years. So that's beginning to happen more
and more. Not many from Mexico, even though we have
an agreement to know.
I don't think they're any more rigorous. I think
probably the creative
side of it is probably stressed more in terms of
thinking out of the box and thinking about what
could be. Because I can remember the early PhD
program, we had eight areas we were responsible
for in education. And we had to try to master all
eight of those areas in our written exams and
everything else. And in many ways, of course, we
had to take two languages in. Now we take
statistics and measurements. Perhaps part of
that was a waste. It was certainly a mental
discipline. But I really believe that the rigor
really has not changed. The technology has
certainly changed a bit. And I'm experiencing
that right now with our new APDGN system. And
finding some limitations in that, knowing full
well that eventually it's going to be a benefit.
I guess it's really close between the
organizational behavior, especially the
motivation leadership elements, and the futures
class with the vision element, which is
motivational. So those two courses, I have
difficulty deciding between those two because I
go into both those classes each night excited,
pumped up, I try to get well prepared. I tell them
that when they walk into that class, they better be
ready, because I'm going to be ready. So those two I
really enjoy. The third one, I don't have to really
ramp up so much, because they go online. The first
two or three nights, we've got to get them set the
stage. But I think the leadership, motivation,
organizational behavior, and the visioning and
futuring are my favorite classes.
.
I get here sometime between 8 and 9, depends on the
day, and stay until 6, 6.30. But often, spring
semester, I have two night classes that go from 5 to
8. So that's about nine to eight days, usually. And
I work out during the noon hour. I get an hour and a
half break with the long days. But I guess it's a
rare day that I'm here under seven hours,
most all that time, unless I'm in a doctoral
committee meeting. And those happen about, on the
average, twice a week during the fall and spring
semester. I'm chairing probably right now six to
seven dissertations in the writing stage. I chair
about 31 committees. And I sit on probably about 30
more, and working with five or six master's
students in their degree. So while I'm not at the
office, I'll probably be watching TV or eat often
with this patient in my lap. And most of my trips on
the plane, heading for speaking somewhere, I'll
carry dissertations with me and proposals. And
that helps a lot. Usually when I go give a speech
somewhere, I grab stuff in my lap and prepare it
in the plane. I'm a jogger, a runner. I go to the rec
center about five days a week and run and lift.
We've got the good knowledge equipment, those
kinds of things. I've got a lake home out at Kent
Creek Lake. And that's been the state sort of place
where we can go and just kind of forget things for a
while. Travel. Carol and I love to travel. And I can
be in Italy one day and things start drifting away.
After the third day, I forget I'm even a professor
there, even though I'm teaching undergraduates
over there. So I have to fill those things in
because it's just relentless, absolutely
relentless in terms of something to do every day.
Yeah. Yeah.